log one 09.29.18 12:31 am

I want to retrace my steps and become familiar with how to calculate the dark
matter content of a galaxy (again). This will help me think through what I'll
need to code in my program as well as assumptions I'll need to systematically
challenge.

Step one: rotational velocity. I need this value to ultimately calculate the
galaxy's dynamical mass, according to my original project. So, using google,
I've landed on this website: https://dept.astro.lsa.umich.edu/resources/ugactivi
ties/Labs/tully_fisher/tf_intro.html.

Interesting fact I never knew: there's a correlation between how fast a spiral
galaxy spins, and how bright it is - this is called the Tully-Fisher Relation!
That sounds fascinating, and while I do have a guess as to why this is the case
I'd love to read more about the physics of this phenomenon later. It seems to be
pretty impactful, according to this webpage - "By comparing your spiral galaxies
to our next-door neighbor spiral galaxy (the Andromeda galaxy), you'll be able
to figure out how far away they are, and measure the Hubble constant and the age
of the Universe!"

According to this site, I'll need the rotation curves of the galaxies. I need to
refresh myself on what exactly this means and how it relates (if at all) to the
2-D spectra I used in my original probject. I will also need to remember how to
use SAOImage DS9 again. According to this website, I'll need to look at the
observed redshift for the "H-alpha line at various positions along the disk of
each galaxy". I think it'd be worthwhile to look into how this data is gathered,
why this data gives me the information I need, and why this is the best method
to use (at self: do this later!!!).

Good thing to know (and fact-check): H-alpha normally has a wavelength of 656.3
nm!

The wavelength of one side of the galaxy (for H-alpha, I presume) will be
greater than the other side - this is the wavelength of the redshifted side
that's moving away from us. (Note to self, in case I mess it up later: blueshift
is moving closer. Redshift is moving farther away. You got this information from
wikipedia, so check that it's true from somewhere a little more credible just to
be 100% sure.) This fact's most rational explanation is that the galaxy's
spinning! Good stuff.

Using the redshift and blueshift values at the edge of the galaxy, in my
original project we used these to calculate rotational velocity. However, on
this webpage they are calculating the recessional velocity instead. I'll need to
look into how these two compare when it comes to what they can tell me. I'll
also need to check whether these equations assume the entity is circular or not
- since we're most likely dealing with spiral galaxies (question: do all
galaxies spin?) those are ellipses and not circles.

I need to sleep because I have things to do tomorrow but I'll continue when I
can. Good night, and to NGC 6946: I love you.

12:48 am.
